Okay, I have a whole bank of tape recorders rolling here in the background.
Okay, about how long do you think this is going to take us to do this? About curiosity, say?
Oh, we'll rattle along for about 30, 45 minutes whenever you get tired.
It's real, you know, if you need to stop, you need to quit, if we need to pick it up sometime later, that's fine.
Just go ahead and say so.
I just wanted to find out, you know, if I...
If you want to take a swig out of the Jack Daniels bottle, just say, excuse me a second, you know.
No problem.
So let's get started with a lot of real mundane things here.
Okay, we'll see what kind of answers I can give to them.
We'll talk about...let's just start off with a real basic question that you can answer in as much detail as you would like.
We'll ask you, what type of store is it that you own?
Okay. The Fantastic World's bookstore, the store that I own, started off, you know, two and a half years ago,
and we specialize in items of the Fantastic.
We have comic books, science fiction books, fantasy role-playing games, video games, and science fiction movies on videotape,
and all the other paraphernalia that you would expect in relation to those items.
For example, lead miniatures for role-playing games or dice, bags to put comics in,
boxes, posters, portfolios, movie posters.
So just an assortment of things, you know, related.
We go all the way from talking animals like Garfield to Superman to Doctor Who and to Felix the Cat.
Just a wide variety of things.
All...the only common element is that they're all science fiction fantasy concepts to some extent.
That's your answer.
Yeah, okay. I should have mentioned that.
One thing we do is there'll be a pause after your answer.
Makes it easier to...yes, I should realize these things myself.
Yeah, and also, let me know that you are actually finished talking.
Yes.
Okay, let's back up a little bit, and why don't you tell us how you got started in collecting?
The way I got started in collecting is actually the way I got started in reading.
My paternal grandfather was a bus driver.
He used to pick up the comic books that people left on the bus and bring them, you know, and then I would get them from him.
So I learned how to read when I was about five years old by reading comic books that were left on buses.
So everyone who rode on a bus through a bunch of Texas in 1959, 1958, 1960,
you know, I'm in their debt for being able to read from an early age and from my love of comics and science fiction.
And I went from that to keeping the comics that I had read and putting them on a little shelf in my closet.
And from that point, it began to snowball where, you know, I began picking up anything that I felt was related to comics.
And then I eventually got into science fiction reading when I met Fritz Leiber at a convention in 1968.
Okay, Bob, why don't you go into a little bit more detail as to how that kind of got into your collecting sort of merged with your business?
At one point, you know, I noticed that my personal taste in comic books, the ones that I felt were the superior examples of comic books as an art.
And the ones that seem to be increasing in value on the collector's market had a lot in common.
And I began to feel that there was the potential that if I picked up a couple of extra copies of the ones that I felt were really good comics that they would appreciate in value faster than just going and buying a handful at random.
And so I began to speculate in collecting books by buying them in the hope that someone would come along later and want to pay me more money for them than I had paid for myself.
And then I began to do the same thing with science fiction books, but on the smaller margin I began buying books from England, which were not generally available in this country in the late 70s, and taking them to conventions and selling those.
And I kept sending aside more and more extra comics and more and more books, and I realized that I had to either buy myself a larger house to store all this stuff in, that I was only using a couple of times a year or going ahead and open a store for retailing.
I chose to open a store because this has much more tax evan just to owning a house just to store books in.
Okay, let's get into a little bit more specifically on the collecting. What do you concentrate on when you're collecting? Which particular type of item?
Do you want in general for myself or do people generally concentrate on?
Let's talk about yourself. When you're collecting, what do you concentrate on?
At this time, my main collections, I'm collecting things by Philip Jose Farmer, Michael Moorcock, and Carl Nellison.
And so I just concentrate essentially on finding things that I don't already have, and I work off of bibliographies and lists and try to find things in better condition than the ones I already have.
So looking for hardcover books where they were published in small quantities and looking for paperback books that are published under pseudonyms or from small presses are the things that require the most attention for finding them at inexpensive prices.
And the best way to do that is to be aware of what names the authors have written works under and what publishers their work has appeared from so that you can kind of train your mind to key off whenever you see that publisher's name or the title of the book, even if you don't remember the author.
Okay, you're starting touching on another question I've got here. Let's get into it a little more specifically. And what makes a book, a hardback book, a valuable collector's type of collectible?
Well, from the simplest standpoint, what makes a hardback book collectible to anyone is simply supply and demand, and that there are more people wanting the book than there are books available at cover price.
Usually this doesn't take place, obviously, until after the book is out of print. Oftentimes, science fiction fans will see a hardcover book and they'll say, hmm, well, if I wait a year, I can buy that in paperback, and they'll pass the book up.
And then when the book comes out in paperback, they read it and discover it's the greatest thing, because they put raisins and bread. So they go back and they want to buy a hardcover for a durable copy.
However, at this time, the publisher has probably already either remainder the book or allowed the book to go out of print when all the copies were sold by the people who did buy a hardcover.
And the supply of people out there looking for the book and demanding, I want a copy of book X and no books being available forces the price up on the collector's market.
The other things that can cause the book to become valuable are usually errors in the same way that a stamp being printed upside down would cause a stamp to be valuable.
If a publisher decides to accidentally destroy all the copies of a book so that only a few hundred exist, or if only a few copies are made with some variation that was corrected in another edition, this also can cause the book to be valuable.
And then you also can have a situation where you create a book just to make a book valuable. That would be the case if you have a strictly limited edition where it's signed and numbered.
Let's talk a little bit about those, the specialty edition type pressures and first editions. When a person is collecting, like myself, I collect signed first editions.
What would you look for in a book to say, aside from the fact that you're collecting a specific author, let's say you're just looking at buying a book and you say, gee, I wonder if this is going to increase in value.
Is there any sort of judgment you can use there?
Well, the best judgment that you can use is to try to read as many reviews of recent hardcover books as you can. This is, you know, outside of, you know, going to the library and checking the books out and reading them in hardcover editions.
If you happen to live in a city where the library still has a budget to be able to afford to buy such, you know, things as science fiction hardcover books.
Reviews, the only thing that you can use to guide yourself with any certainty is to find someone that writes reviews that generally has the same type of taste that you have.
There are some things which obviously you can be pretty sure of that a new Arthur C. Clark novel is going to be, you know, of interest to a number of people, even if it's no good, that, you know, people would still want,
that merely because it's by Arthur C. Clark. The biggest problem is if someone happens to get a book published in hardcover and they do not have a name built up for themselves, that's a real gamble, you know, to spend $12, $15, $20 to find out if the book is worthwhile.
And this is generally where books tend to springboard a lot. A good example of this is that the books by Julian May, the many colored land, and the golden torque has shown a great deal of increase in attention from book buyers in hardcover since they were, you know, nominated for awards in the science fiction community.
And since the book club edition came out, bringing a cheap edition that a lot of people were able to read, after it was read by a lot of people, people were going, hey, you know, I like this book, where can I get the hardcover?
And we've sold more copies of the hardcover of the many colored land in our store since the book club edition of this particular book came out than we did in the entire time that it had been released.
Let's talk a little bit about the books from the standpoint of collectability as far as book club editions and standard publishing house editions.
All right. For the most part, if you're buying a book club edition of a book, if it's already been published in hardcover by a publisher, and the book club edition is a reprint, the book club edition has no collectible value whatsoever.
The only thing you're doing is you're buying a disposable book, which, you know, you're buying a paperback that has hardcovers, but it's not going to ever have any collectible value.
In my opinion, in most people's opinion, they're in the rare book trade.
The only way a book club edition might have a value would be if it's the first hardcover edition. An example of this would be if DAW Books brings out a novel by C.J. Chara and the book club brings out a hardcover edition of it.
That would be the first hardcover edition of the book, so it would have a collectible value as a hardcover edition.
But beyond that, beyond the times when the book club brings out the only hardcover edition of a paperback book, the book club editions, you know, just do not have any collectible value because they're not first printings and they're not true hardcover book editions.
Okay. Limiting yourself to science fiction and fantasy as far as categories go, how much can a book cost from the various things you've seen over the years?
How much can a book cost?
Okay, let's look.
What's the question down? Is it what you want to know? How much a book can go up in price?
Yeah, yeah, and is it a hardcover used book, old book or what?
Yeah, let's talk in respect to a used book or the highest price you've ever seen on a book going for sale and stuff like that.
Well, the highest prices on hardcover books right now in the field tend to be in books that were published by specially publishers before there was mass distribution of hardcover fiction for science fiction and fantasy.
Examples being especially like Arkham House books.
The early books by H.P. Lovecraft and Robert E. Howard and hardcover from Arkham House go for a great amount of money even if they're in only so-so condition.
That's a good example of a book being worth hundreds of dollars that cost less than ten dollars for the most part when they were first published.
Yeah, okay, I know where there are several of the Arkham House first editions in immaculate shape. I can only get my hands on them.
Well, I know there's some R2, but they have me in people's collections and they would take offense if I wouldn't put my hands on them.
These are not in somebody's collection. These are in a library.
A library. Of course, this is a ring of appointments you haven't asked, but a book having been in the library and stamped with library stamps and having had a card pocket attached to it and glued in does decrease the value of a book and make it less desirable to a collector.
It's the same way that if you had a book that someone had taken a mark slot and scrolled across a couple of pages, it would be less desirable.
Except like on an extremely rare book where library copies might be some of the only copies you could actually get a hold of.
Well, they'd still be less desirable than a perfect copy, but if you had a choice between no copy and a copy that wasn't in perfect condition, obviously you would probably be inclined to go ahead and take a less than perfect copy.
There are a few books in my collection that were from libraries that had had clearance sales, so to speak, where they go through and take the books out that have been circulating.
I have a copy of Philip Jose Farmer's The Green Odyssey and a Ballantyne book's hardcover that had a convention in the summer.
Philip Jose Farmer signed the book and told me that there were only a couple of hundred copies of that book that actually were distributed, that most of them ended up in military libraries.
So it was rare to see one at all, but it was rare to see one that wasn't a library book.
Any other sort of accidental finds that were kind of valuable?
In my own collection?
Yes.
I've had a number of strokes of what I would have to consider luck as far as finding books that I consider to be quite valuable.
I was at a book fair at one time with Lewis Shiner, a short story writer who's appeared in Omni and Shayol in various magazines, and we were just looking through tons and tons of hardcover books, miles and miles of historical romances.
And we were giving up and over in a little bitty pile on the side, there was a little bitty book, a little bit was sticking out and looked familiar.
It was a Nome Press book written by Henry Cutner and the name Lewis Padgett called Robots Have No Tales that was in perfect condition and they had priced it, but I thought it was the outrageous price of 40 cents.
But I went on ahead and paid the 40 cents.
That was a tough blow to pay that much money for a book worth just 100, 200 times more than that, but I was able to tear loose the money.
It's a rough life.
Yes.
What part of your collection are you most proud of?
I would have to say that there's not really any one item that I'm most proud of as far as being difficult to find.
I do have a one of a kind item in my collection that I purchased at an auction this last summer.
It's a translation from the French of the book, Philippe of the Farmer, conquers the universe.
That Philippe of the Farmer donated to an auction at a convention that my store sponsored in Dallas during the summer.
That has a cover letter and it's signed by Mothoposé Farmer and a copy of the book in French that was translated from.
It's a translation that the publisher who has the option on this book, Berkeley Books, has decided that they did not want to publish in that form.
So that will be the only version of that in English.
So I suppose as far as the rarity, having the only copy floating around of that should be a novelty to some extent.
Something along the same line, I know this is a pretty open-ended question, but what would you consider to be the ultimate item or items in collecting in the hardcover field, I guess?
Well, among the ultimate items to find in the hardcover field are some of the double-day hardcover books of recent years that had very small printings and for one reason or another had very small distribution.
To the come to mind are Roger Zalassny's Nine Princes in Amber and Philippe of the Farmer's Flesh.
And I would be in the position of passing apocryphal, potentially, stories about why these books are in slow editions or small editions.
But my understanding is that both of these books were re-majored very quickly upon publication and had very little distribution outside of review copies and library copies.
So those books are both hard to find. I've only seen two copies of either of those books in the time that I've been collecting books and looking at hardcover since about 69.
And I have one of them.
Which one do you have, sir?
Nine Princes in Amber.
Okay.
Yeah.
Probably paid more than the cover price for the book.
A few bucks more, yeah.
Let's talk a little bit about the...what type of science fiction do you read for pleasure?
What type of science fiction do I read for pleasure?
I'd really prefer not to answer that, not to have that particular comment about not answering that included in the program.
No problem, no problem.
I can go off on the sidebar here and tell you, not for transmission, that right now I'm having a difficult time reading science fiction because I've been writing for so long that I've gotten to a saturation point.
But I'd rather not try to explain that right now to a, you know, over the air type thing.
No, no problem. In fact, I have the same problem myself. I haven't read anything in nearly a year.
That's how come I edit the show and I produce it, but I don't actually...
But, you know, I can...you know, I have read...you know, you can ask me what books I've read recently because I have started reading stuff again, but I'm not reading them for...you know, the only thing I've read for pleasure lately is Fever Dream by George Martin.
I wouldn't consider that a science fiction book at all.
Yeah, yeah. In fact, George's book is one of the first ones I'm going to pick up and read after Christmas. Let's get back to something else.
Okay.
Your customers, your customers, what are they most interested in in science fiction or fantasy or what do they seem to buy the most of?
Well, right now, the types of things that are the most popular with my customers in mass, the ones that sell the most, are pretty much the same things that are reflected in most specialty stores in North America.
If you check the Locust's best seller list and things, and it appears Anthony's Xanth books sell tremendously well, and the various books in the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy series by Douglas Adams sell well.
And beyond that, we sell the Thieves World series by Robert Lynn Astor very well.
I think a common thing in all three of these books is that these books are not serious completely. They don't...there's a bit of whimsy in all of them.
I think it's safe to say that the bulk of my clientele prefers a little bit of humor and lightness mixed in with their reading.
But we have strong backless sales in almost every aspect of science fiction, fantasy, and horror.
Okay, let's see. Are you still actively collecting?
I'm not collecting as actively as I was a few years ago. It's only because that running my own business like this has taken a lot more time than I would have dreamed it would when I began.
So I don't really have the time to go to conventions and prowl through thousands of books looking for those one or two elusive items.
I don't have time to go driving around the countryside, you know, prowling through every used bookstore that I happen to spy off the road.
I don't even have the money to pay for the gas at the current gas prices to do that, even if I had the time.
So my collecting is still coming strong. I do have one advantage that most people don't have.
Whenever people decide to get rid of their collection, they bring it in and they say, you know, Bob, would you like to buy my collection?
They come in with it and you look at what they've got and you make them an offer and they refuse and you make them another offer and they accept.
I get to go through it first and pick out what I want for myself. And I make myself some really good deals.
So I do have that advantage which kind of makes up for not being able to go out and look around for stuff as much as I used to.
I envy you that.
Sort of a collector's question. As far as the storage and preservation of books, what sort of things would you recommend that a collector do?
Well, there are a number of, let's say, schools of thought on this.
Obviously, the ultimate type of thing you could do would be to go with archival situations where you would have it so that the humidity and the temperature would all be controlled.
You would keep everything out of direct sunlight so that you wouldn't have any fading.
But the best thing you can do is make sure that your books are not going to be getting any direct sunlight to cause fading on the spines or fading on the pages.
That you handle the books with care, that you don't eat food or take a bath while you read them, that you don't loan them out to people who drool.
Just common sense things will extend the life of the books.
Beyond that, we've found that the part of the book that usually gets damaged the easiest is the thin paper dust jacket around the book.
And there are plastic slip covers that are available to put those into similar to what a library uses, but they don't have to be pasted down or stapled or taped down to the boards of the book.
This protects the dust jacket and also makes it where if you're holding the book that you don't get fingerprints on the dust jacket or greasy marks on it.
Beyond that, just keeping the books dusted, obviously you want to keep them away from termites or anything that happens to find paper as a real feast for food.
You don't want a storm underneath a pipe that drips or where your air conditioner condensation is going to leak out.
Just anything that you should stop and think about storing paper products, just anything that's going to cause paper damage you should try to avoid.
Okay, what about a more perishable item like a comic book storage or something like that?
Well, a comic book, if you're going to keep a comic book for a collection, it's important to handle it carefully.
And if you're going to keep it, you should bag it up, at least in a plastic bag.
If you have a comic book that's worth over $50-100, you might want to invest in bags of a type of plastic in which a lot of the things that would be in a plastic that would potentially cause the comic to deteriorate in 50 or 100 years would be neutralized.
If you want to go further along, if you have comic books that are worth hundreds of dollars, there are things in the process of making pulp paper that will eventually cause it to rot.
You can have this stuff de-acidified.
But there's no point in doing this with just every comic book on the shelf.
Actually, if you don't have any errors and you don't plan to be donating these to a library or something, comic books that they're handled properly are going to outlive you most likely.
There's no real danger involved.
They should be kept away from high humidity and excessive extremes of temperature and kept in a dry and cool place and kept out of direct sunlight.
There are plenty of boxes that are available commercially to store comics in that can keep up to 300 of them.
This is important because time is so easily damaged because they're so thin the paper is such a light weight stock.
It's just a matter of just properly caring for them and keeping them from being bitten damaged.
Okay, let's talk just a little bit more specifically on comics because I still collect a few.
Hard to think how to word this one exactly.
When I started collecting comics, I didn't collect them because I thought it was going to become something valuable on down the line.
What about now if somebody was starting to collect comics? How would you recommend they go about it?
Well, the first recommendation I make to people if they come in and say, I read that so-and-so comic book has gone up a thousand percent in two years.
What comic book would you recommend that I should start collecting?
I tell people that they really shouldn't be buying comics unless they enjoy reading comics.
If there's nothing in that comic they enjoy reading, then they're making a mistake getting into comics because there are other things they could invest money in
that the people will not laugh at you when you go to the bank and tell them that you want to use it for collateral.
So if a comic book has an investment, it's the kind of thing that's really been overplayed in the media to some extent.
I mean, it sounds real good for the few comics that have appreciated a great deal of value,
but speaking from experience, a bank does not really think that that's the kind of collateral they want to hold for a loan.
So stocks and bonds still sound preferable to me as investments.
The biggest thing that's happened in comic books recently is probably the biggest thing that's happened since comic books began
is that the ownership of some of the characters is now being held by the individual creators in much the same way that a publisher does not own a novel by Isaac Asimov.
Isaac Asimov would own the copyright.
And now comic books are coming out where the writer or the artist or both own the copyright to the character,
and the publisher is publishing it for them in the same kind of relationship that a book publisher has with a novelist.
And this is a complete change in the former system of the publisher owning everything, everything being done on a work-for-hire basis,
as though the artist was just coming in and doing the same type of function as sweeping the floors inside the corporate offices.
This is going to be a change that's going to become more and more evident in the next few years, and it's going to create a lot of more excitement within the comic book field.
I wasn't aware that they had done that.
Just from your own speculation, how do you think that might change the comics industry?
Well, I have to go back a little bit.
The other thing that has changed the comic industry is the change in distribution, where at one time all the comic books pretty much were available at 7-Eleven's and drug stores.
And at 7-Eleven bought them from a distributor, the same people used to that had a TV guide, Time Magazine and such things.
And they got a bundle of comic books in, and what they didn't sell, they sent back for credit.
And this meant that the publishers had to print just like on anything else, had to print, you know, let's say 500,000 and they sold 200,000 and 300,000 got thrown away.
With the rise of specialty shops that sell comic books and science fiction books, those shops order their comics in a different fashion.
They order them non-returnable.
They get a better discount, but they have to keep everything they order.
And it's now to the point where a lot of comic titles are being published only in the non-returnable format.
So if a person is only buying their comic books at a 7-Eleven or in a small town that doesn't have a specialty store, there are a number of titles they would never have seen.
In fact, there are titles that are being published only for specialty store distribution that are selling better than some of the comic books that have distribution in both forms.
Examples of this would be Camelot 3000 from DC Comics, which takes the King Arthur saga, brings it back to life, but in the year 3000.
Star Slayer from Pacific Comics just moving to another company called First Comics, which takes a man from out of the past and springs him into the future, where he goes around and finds alien menaces and zooms from galaxy to galaxy.
These titles are only published in specialty stores.
And the thing with the book like Star Slayer, which is written and drawn by Mike Grell, who used to work for DC Comics doing The Warlord, is that Mike Grell owns the copyright to Star Slayer.
And the fact that Mike Grell owns the copyright means that when his contract with the publisher Pacific Comics expired with issue number 6, he was able to find a better deal and make more money from himself and take it to First Comics, a new publishing company out of Chicago for starting with issue number 7.
The idea that a person could move a character from one company to another for a better financial deal had never occurred any one a few years ago under the old system of publishing.
But in the same way in book publishing, then not every novel by an author necessarily is going to come out from the same publisher. There's no reason for every issue of a comic book to come out from the same publisher.
Yeah, that is very interesting.
Let's see, we've covered most of the things I have here. Let's go to one for a good old educational question.
What would you advise a person with this, we've covered quite a bit in comics.
What about somebody who's just getting into science fiction or fantasy hardcover or paperback and they start asking you about, well, what about collecting, you know, what would you advise a beginning collector as far as selection or something like that?
Well, first thing I would do, obviously a person is going to come in and say, I want to start collecting, has already read some stuff.
So I would say to them, what have you read so far? It can be the name of some authors that you've enjoyed, some books that you've liked.
I would springboard off of that, deporting out things that I would feel would be, you know, good collectible books within their field of interest.
So that was how I would handle that particular situation.
Okay, yeah.
Give me like an example if you were to come in and say, you know, I'm so and so, I like this and this, you know, I could, but each of these kind of things I handle on an individual basis.
Because you can't really tailor a response overall, you know, it just has to be geared for the individual customers wants and needs.
Yeah, no, no, that's perfectly adequate answer Bob.
Let's see.
You might not want to answer this one in that somebody listening to this program may get in their car in California and drive and find your house and rip you off.
How large is your collection?
Well, I understand that it's not possible to drive from California to Texas without paying a real heavy toll somewhere between Abilene and Fort Worth, so that probably won't be a problem.
My collection covers the walls of two rooms in my house.
My house was built in about 1912 and has very, very high ceilings and the stuff goes from Florida's ceiling.
I really don't have any idea how many books are my collection right now because it kind of fluxes.
You know, occasionally I go through and I purge a few things out and I come back in and add, you know, twice as many as to what I purged down.
But my hardcover books cover, you know, two of the walls, pay-or-back books from all the other walls.
But I have, for example, complete collections of all of the fiction of Philpase Farmer, Michael Morkock, Harlan Ellison, and one former another.
I don't have all the editions of their work, but I have all their books.
The same way with the number of other authors, Robert Block, James Blish, and authors obviously that heavily used to handful the books in print that are younger authors have just started the business on a relative basis.
Okay. That's about it. Got it covered, Bob. I think you did a very good interview.
There's a lot of other things we could talk about, the art portfolios and other things which are collectible items.
But I think we covered quite a bit as far as these shows are geared toward the print medium, comic books, paperbacks, and hardcover.
Right.
And this will probably be, you know John Marks, don't you?
Yeah.
I'm going to go ahead and kill the tape machines.
Oh.
Okay. Tape recorders are rolling again.
If you would give me your address, the one that you use for your mail order, and if you also wish to include the phone number down there, just go ahead and do it.
And this will be worked into the programs of course.
Okay.
Okay. That's Fantastic World's Bookstore.
4816A is an Apple Camp Buoy Boulevard. Fort Worth, Texas. 7-6107.
And our phone number is 817-731-6222.
Call now. Operators are standing by.
It slices it, dices it. Okay.